---
title: "Radio Links 3: June 2020"
date: 2020-07-03T20:40:00+01:00
tags:
 - radio
 - electronics
---

After a busy month, I'm back with some more interesting radio links. This time
there's a bit of a mix, including a modem, an article on ATUs and a NASA video.
Enjoy. If you want to see the previous post in this series, it's
[here](https://hackerific.net/2020/05/11/radio-links-2-may-2020/).

## Open Hardware Modem

This is a cool open hardware modem with connections for a walkie talkie, so
designed for ax.25, and similar protocols, like APRS. I saw this featured on
[Hackaday](https://hackaday.com/2020/06/09/an-open-hardware-modem-for-the-modern-era/),
but the [main website](https://unsigned.io/openmodem/) has some great content.

The actual device is â‚¬89 from
[unsigned.io](https://unsigned.io/product/openmodem/), where you can also pick
up some other interesting gear, like the
[Rnode](https://unsigned.io/projects/rnode/), a LoRa compatible TNC. 

Actually, reading about Rnode, that's actually more exciting that the modem!
Definitely worth a look! (Schematics and docs on
[github(https://github.com/markqvist/RNode_Firmware)]).

## T-Network antenna tuners

Here's a [1995 QST
article](http://www.arrl.org/files/file/Technology/tis/info/pdf/9501046.pdf)
about T-Network antenna tuners. The article says that most built-in and
shop-bought ATUs use T-networks, and I'm pretty sure that hasn't changed since
'95.

The article has a wealth of information on tuners and their use, and an
interesting way of attempting to find the minimum possible SWR using a T tuner,
well two ways, one for tapped inductors and one for roller inductors, those
magical bits of gear that cost an arm and a leg.

To see what I mean, search eBay, [this is the
beauty](https://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/GIANT-VARIABLE-ROLLER-INDUCTOR-COIL-HF-POWER-AMPLIFIER-ANTENNA-TUNER-HI-PWR/363018963936?hash=item54859dcbe0:g:vyoAAOSwoRBaiG5C) I
keep seeing:

![](https://i.ebayimg.com/images/g/vyoAAOSwoRBaiG5C/s-l1600.jpg)


## A decade of sun

This is pretty amazing. NASA has been taking images of the sun every 0.75
seconds and has produced this [youtube
video](https://kottke.org/20/06/a-decade-of-sun), showing a year per second.
There are some really cool events in here, like some massive solar storms, the
transit of Venus and some big sunspots (remember those?!)

{{< youtube l3QQQu7QLoM >}}

