---
title: "Building a Sofle keyboard"
date: 2021-04-08
keywords:
- keyboard
- diy
- electronics
- mechboards
tags:
- mechboards
- electronics
---

After considering my options for a little while, I decided to build myself a
split ergonomic keyboard.  I'm used to a 60% board, so my decision making
process came down to three main things: 1. what's similar to them and 2. what
will work with my [Royal Navy DSA
keycaps](http://www.mechsupply.co.uk/product/dsa-royal-navy) (i.e. standard key
sizes) and 3. what uses QMK firmware? I settled on making a
[Sofle](https://josef-adamcik.cz/electronics/let-me-introduce-you-sofle-keyboard-split-keyboard-based-on-lily58.html)
board, with a custom layout, tweaked for my left-handed weird typing.

## Picking a board

As I said above, I wanted a board a bit like my [60%
board](https://github.com/mattfoster/gh60-satan-keymap), and certainly nothing
too much smaller. I've played a bit with ortholinear boards but wasn't keen, I
and decided that things like the
[katana60](http://xahlee.info/kbd/katana60_keyboard.html), while cool, were
just not different enough to be interesting here. My colleague
[Vasko](https://skozl.com/) has an Iris board which looks close to perfect,
except I like the idea of the bottom row being more standardised[^1]. After
whittling down my choices based on size and layout I was really only left with
the [lily58](https://github.com/kata0510/Lily58) and Sofle, and I picked the
Sofle because it has rotary encoders, and they looked fun!

So, with that decided I looked into how to get one, including pricing having
PCBs made by [JLCPCB](Https://jlcpcb.com). This would have given me the boards
and top and bottom plates for about 22 GBP plus delivery, so not bad, but I
wanted acrylic plates, and I'm impatient. While I was trying to work out how to
get plates I discovered that
[mechboards](https://mechboards.co.uk/shop/kits/sofle-kit/) sell kits, so at
that point I decided to just get that. In addition to the kit I bought some
pro-micro clones and a braided USB cable from Amazon. Sourcing the bits from
elsewhere might have saved a little, but not much (the original author provides
full details). I also settled on Cherry Brown switches and bought them at the
same time. Here's what I ended up with, if you're interested in more details,
read on: 

{{< figure src="/images/posts/sofle.jpg" 
    title="My custom Sofle keyboard"
    alt="My custom split keyboard"
>}}

## Building

I'm no stranger to soldering and I followed the [build
guide](https://josef-adamcik.cz/electronics/soflekeyboard-build-log-and-build-guide.html),
finding it pretty easy. I have a cheap hot air soldering station so I used that
for the diodes, which sped things up a lot. The other bits just go on as
normal, so just take your time and make sure you don't miss any switch
sockets (like I did!). If you haven't soldered before then try some
through-hole projects first! The boards are identical, and Josef's trick of
marking the tops with tape is a good one, you don't want to accidentally
populate the wrong side of one.

The kit didn't include headers or sockets for the micros or screens, so I
soldered them directly to the PCBs. If you are likely to want to switch them
out then it would be worth using sockets, but you'll increase the height of the
screens, and clone pro-micros are really cheap unless you spring for USB-C
connectors, so I don't think it's worth it. As I said, just follow the build
guide and you'll be done pretty quickly, the guide even has basic instructions
on flashing QMK.

## Firmware

The first thing I realised when I tried the default layout is that I hit the
space bar with my left thumb, so having enter there was a big no! The next
thing I noticed is that the arrows were optimised for a right-hander and so on
the right half[^2], and then I noticed that I wanted escape at the top left,
and tab underneath. From there, I quickly decided to have control where caps
lock would normally be and to give myself a `hyper` key on the bottom left.
Another oddity is that I rarely use the GUI and control keys on the right, so I
decided to leave most of that. Finally, while they are easily togged via the
default firmware I like to have GUI (cmd) on the inside, close to space, with
alt next.

With all these seemingly arbitrary constraints in place I set about messing
with the firmware, and came up with this:

{{< figure src="/images/posts/soflekeyboard.png" 
    title="My custom layout"
    link="http://www.keyboard-layout-editor.com/#/gists/d77a85b6a6c9bc1abefbb7531e7756f1"
    alt="My custom split keyboard layout, showing three layers"
>}}

As you can see I've yet to decide what to do with the right hand side, but
that's no big deal. While I was messing with the firmware I also added a custom
logo to the left display (the secondary) and tweaked the detection for the
primary because it wasn't working, resulting in only one side doing anything.

My custom logo is just a left hand, drawn in pixelmator and then converted to
an array of bytes with [image2cpp](https://javl.github.io/image2cpp/). As you
can see, pixel art isn't my forte!

{{< figure src="/images/posts/hand.png"
    title="Keyboard logo"
    link="https://javl.github.io/image2cpp/"
    alt="My custom logo, it's a left hand, face down, and the word 'lefty'"
>}}

I've put my keymap on
[GitHub](https://github.com/mattfoster/sofle-lefty-keymap), and you can grab it
by checking it out into `keyboards/sofle/keymaps` in a clone of QMK:

```
git clone git@github.com:mattfoster/sofle-lefty-keymap.git lefty
```

then build/flash with `make sofle:lefty:flash` in the root.

## Training and muscle memory

I built this a few weeks ago, and while I'm getting better, I'm still not used
to using it! Mostly because I'm an awful touch-typist and use the wrong fingers
for some letters, and partly because I use my left hand too much! 

It's not quite my daily driver yet, and when work is not too busy I'm gradually
ramping up my use, which is helping a lot, and I expect to be used to it soon.
Having to use layers for symbols slows me down a lot, so I'm considering
printing a diagram. Also, the boards are a lot lighter than my 60%, which has a
chunky case, so they don't feel as sturdy and I'm considering getting a metal
base cut. But, I'd also like to tilt them if I can work out how... so many
options. Overall, I have no regrets, this has turned into a fun project.


[^1]: actually now I've used the Sofle a bit I can see how the positioning on the Iris would be good.
[^2]: I can and do use vim's movement keys a fair amount but only in `vim`. Outside I like `wasd`, since that's what I use when gaming.

